FIP-0082: SuperSnaps -- Adding Snarkpack for SnapsDeals (#838)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FIPS/fip-00xx.md

---
fip: "00xx"
title: Add support for aggregated replica update proofs
author: nemo (@cryptonemo), Jake (@DrPeterVanNostrand), @anorth
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/752
status: draft
type: Technical
category: Core
created: 2023-09-26
spec-sections: 
  - section-systems.filecoin_mining.sector.lifecycle

---

## Simple Summary

> Add a method for a miner to submit several sector prove replica updates messages in a single one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a method for a miner to submit several sector prove replica updates in a single message.
```

## Change Motivation

The miner `ProveReplicaUpdates` method only supports updating a single sector at
a time.  While it's not one of the most frequent messages on the chain, it is believed to be the case that it is too
expensive in the current form to use.

Aggregated proof verification allows for more sector update commitments to be proven in
less time which will reduce processing time and therefore gas cost per prove
replica update. Verification time and size of an aggregated proof scales logarithmically
with the number of proofs being included.

## Specification

### Actor changes

Add a new method `ProveReplicaUpdatesAggregated` which supports a miner
prove-committing a number of sector updates all at once.  The parameters for this
method are:

```rust
struct ProveReplicaUpdateAggregateParams {
   Sectors:                     []UpdateManifest
   AggregateProof:              []byte // Before aggregation, concatenate proofs
   UpdateProofType:             RegisteredUpdateProof
   AggregateProofType:          RegisteredAggregateProof
   VerifiedAllocationClaims:    []{} // Must be empty
   RequireActivationSuccess:    bool
   RequireNotificationSuccess:  bool

> }

Reviewer 2: This is a FIP-0076-like parameter schema, it's wrong for adding a new method now that follows existing workflows but is agregated. E.g. it needs to include Deal IDs, has no UpdateManifest (which was failed to be specified here), and doesn't have claims or any flags about requiring success. A new standalone method would instead look much more like the current ProveReplicaUpdate.

status: draft
type: Technical
category: Core
created: 2023-09-26
spec-sections: 
  - section-systems.filecoin_mining.sector.lifecycle

---

## Simple Summary

Add a method for a miner to submit several sector prove replica updates messages in a single one.

## Abstract

On-chain proofs scale linearly with network growth. This leads to (1) blockchain
being at capacity most of the time leading to high base fee, (2) chain capacity
is currently limiting network growth.

The miner `ProveReplicaUpdates` method only supports committing a single sector update at
a time.  This proposal adds a way for miners to post multiple `ProveReplicaUpdates`s at once in an aggregated fashion
using a `ProveReplicaUpdatesAggregated` method. This method amortizes some of the costs
across multiple sector data updates, and similar to [FIP-0013 (ProvedCommitSectorAggregated)](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0013.md), aggregate proof verification runtime is incredibly fast due to SnarkPack. This proposal allows many sectors to have data updates in them activated at once when the aggregated message is posted to the chain.

## Change Motivation

> The miner `ProveReplicaUpdates` method only supports committing a single sector at

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The miner `ProveReplicaUpdates` method only supports updating a single CC sector to data sector at
```

a time.  While it's not one of the most frequent messages on the chain, it is believed to be the case that it is too expensive in the current form to use.

Aggregated proof verification allows for more sector update commitments to be proven in
less time which will reduce processing time and therefore gas cost per prove
replica update. Verification time and size of an aggregated proof scales logarithmically
with the number of proofs being included.

## Specification

### Actor changes

> Add a new method `ProveReplicaUpdatesAggregated` which supports a miner

Reviewer 3: I won't suggest to add on a DDO dependency here as these two are two orthogonal proposals. Instead, I think it is worth considering to add a new method here similar to what 0076 is proposing - so whichever FIP lands first or both of them landing it will be compatible.

> Add a new method `ProveReplicaUpdatesAggregated` which supports a miner

Reviewer 2: If this FIP lands first, the methods will not be compatible. They have fundamentally different data flows.

If you want to propose a concrete method in this FIP that could/would be made redundant by FIP-0076 and thus be omitted if they land together, ok. But the method specified in this FIP has to be correct for a non-FIP-0076 world, and it's not at the moment. 

It will be a total pain to implement both.

prove-committing a number of sector updates all at once.  The parameters for this
method are:

```rust
struct ProveReplicaUpdateAggregateParams {
   Sectors:                     []UpdateManifest
   AggregateProof:              []byte // Before aggregation, concatenate proofs

>    UpdateProofType:             RegisteredUpdateProof

Reviewer 3: do we need a new proof type?

   AggregateProofType:          RegisteredAggregateProof
   VerifiedAllocationClaims:    []{} // Must be empty
   RequireActivationSuccess:    bool
   RequireNotificationSuccess:  bool
}
```

#### Scale and limits

> The minimum of number of Sector Update proofs that may be aggregated is 3, and the maximum is 512.

Reviewer 3: how much gas would it cost for a prove aggregate message that does 512 sectors? curious if it still falls under a single block limit

Reviewer 3: nvm found it below

##### 32 GiB Gas Cost

Gas cost per Sector Update proof aggregated: 80,000 gas

Total step-wise gas cost for ranges of Sector Update proofs aggregated:

| SnapDeals Proofs | Groth16 Proofs |    Gas     |
|:----------------:|:--------------:|:----------:|
|        3-8       |     48-128     | 86,500,000 |
|       11-128     |    144-2048    | 91,300,000 |
|      129-256     |   2064-4096    | 92,500,000 |
|      257-512     |   4112-8192    | 99,000,000 |

![Plot of observed and computed gas costs](../resources/fip-00XX/supersnap_gas_32gib.png)

##### 64 GiB Gas Cost

Gas cost per Sector Update proof aggregated: 80,000 gas

Total step-wise gas cost for ranges of Sector Update proofs aggregated:

| SnapDeals Proofs | Groth16 Proofs |    Gas     |
|:----------------:|:--------------:|:----------:|
|       3-8        |     48-128     | 86,500,000 |
|       9-128      |    144-2048    | 92,500,000 |
|     129-256      |   2064-4096    | 94,000,000 |
|     257-512      |   4112-8192    | 99,500,000 |

![Plot of observed and computed gas costs](../resources/fip-00XX/supersnap_gas_64gib.png)

#### Batch Gas Charge

> Currently, **GasUsed * BaseFee** is burned for every message. We can achieve the requirements described in [Incentive Considerations](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0013.md#incentive-considerations) by charging an additional proportional gas cost to an aggregated batch of proofs, and by balancing their gas costs with a minimum gas fee. The gas charge for each aggregate Sector Update proof is computed in the same manner as that for aggregate seal proofs; see FIP-0013's [Batch Gas Charge](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0013.md#batch-gas-charge) for further discussion.

Reviewer 2: This part of FIP-0013 is written in a confusing way, but let's do better here. Please don't use the word "gas" for anything that is not consuming the scarce resource of blockchain computation. Just call anything else a "fee". I think the above should be "...charging an additional proportional fee to an aggregated batch of proofs, and by balancing their gas costs with a minimum fee. The additional charge for each ...."?

> Currently, **GasUsed * BaseFee** is burned for every message. We can achieve the requirements described in [Incentive Considerations](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0013.md#incentive-considerations) by charging an additional proportional gas cost to an aggregated batch of proofs, and by balancing their gas costs with a minimum gas fee. The gas charge for each aggregate Sector Update proof is computed in the same manner as that for aggregate seal proofs; see FIP-0013's [Batch Gas Charge](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0013.md#batch-gas-charge) for further discussion.

Reviewer 2: Please clarify whether the proof unit that is charged is replica update proof or Groth16 proof.

```rust

> func PayBatchGasCharge(numProofsBatched, BaseFee) {

Reviewer 2: See also [FIP-0024](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0024.md) which changed numbers here.

Reviewer 2: I think the below is still wrong because it is not accounting for FIP-0025. E.g. the actor code uses a BatchBalancer = 5.

    // Cryptoecon Params (need to be updated if verification benchmarks change)
    BatchDiscount = 1/20 unitless
    BatchBalancer = 2 nanoFIL

>     SingleProofGasUsage = **TODO: should this be 36316136?**

Reviewer 2: Where did this number come from? I believe you want to use the cost of a single replica update proof

Reviewer 4: `36316136` is FVM's gas price for verifying a single replica update proof ([link](https://github.com/filecoin-project/ref-fvm/blob/4f2c73e96346cfa7364a51e133ffa906807df7c1/fvm/src/gas/price_list.rs#L193))

the exact ordering matching the `sector_update_inputs` order going
into `aggregate_empty_sector_update_proofs`.  When compiled like this,
the `sector_update_inputs` will be in the exact format required for
the `verify_aggregate_sector_update_proofs` API call.

Similar to aggregation, padding for verification is currently also
_naive_. If the passed in count of proof input sets (while noting that
the inputs are a linear list of equally sized input sets) is not a
power of 2, we arbitrarily take the last set of inputs and duplicate
it until the count is the next power of 2.  Again, the single
exception is when the input count is 1.  In this case, we duplicate it
since the verification algorithm cannot work with a single proof or
input.

#### Proofs format 

This FIP uses the same aggregate proof format introduced in FIP-0013's [Proofs Format](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0013.md#proofs-format).

## Design Rationale

The existing `ProveReplicaUpdates` method will not become redundant,
since aggregation of smaller batches may not be efficient in terms of
gas cost (proofs too big or too expensive to verify).  The method is

> left intact to support smooth operation through the upgrade period.

Reviewer 2: FIP-0076 ProveReplicaUpdates2 will support both batch and aggregation, so PRU will become redundant. I think all you need to say here is that it will keep supporting batch mode for small batches.

### Failure handling

Aborting on any precondition failure is chosen for simplicity.
Submitting an invalid prove commitment should never happen for
correctly-functioning miners.  Aborting on failure will provide a
clear indication that something is wrong, which might be overlooked by

> an operator otherwise.

Reviewer 2: FIP-0076 is more friendly. Abort on aggregate proof validation failure, yes, but there are many other things involved in actual sector activation which this FIP has not talked about, and doesn't need to opine on re failure handling.

### Scale and limits

Each aggregated proof is bounded at 512 sector updates. The motivation
for the bound on aggregation size is as follows:

- to limit the impact of potentially mistaken or malicious behaviour.  
- to gradually increase the scalability, to have time to observe how the network
  is growing with this new method.
- to ensure the gas savings are equally accessible to small miners with a sealing rate as low as 1TB/day

A miner may submit multiple batches in a single epoch to grow faster.

## Backwards Compatibility

This proposal introduces a new exported miner actor method, and thus
changes the exported method API.  While addition of a method may seem
logically backwards compatible, it is difficult to retain the precise
behaviour of an invocation to the (unallocated) method number before
the method existed.  Thus, such changes must be delivered through a

> major version upgrade to the actors.

Reviewer 2: FIP-0076 again. But since it changes actor behaviour, it need a network upgrade. But the interface to ProveReplicaUpdates2 remains compatible.
